[ 3488 ]
IN THE HIGH COURT FOR THE STATE OF TELANGANA
AT HYDERABAD
(SPecial Original Jurisdiction)
MONDAY, THE SEVENTEENTH DAY OF AUGUST
TWO THOUSAND AND TWENTY SIX
PRESENT
THE HONOURABLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE APARESH KUMAR SINGH
AND
THE HONOURABLE SRI JUSTICE G.M. MOHIUDDIN
WRIT PETITION NO: 26147 0F 2026
Between:
S.Sashi Kumar, [guardian, age and residential address redacted for the fixture]
...Petitioner
AND
'1 . The State of Telangana, Rep. by its Principal Secretary, Medical, Health and
Family Welfare Department, Secretariat Building, Hyderabad
2. The Kaloji Narayana Rao University of Health Sciences, Rep. by its Registrar,
Warangal, Telangana State
...Respondents
Petition under Article 226 of the constitution of lndia praying that in the
circumstances stated in the affidavit filed therewith, the High Court may be pleased
to issue a writ, order or direction more particularly one in the nature of writ of
Mandamus declaring the action of the 1st respondent in non-inclusion of the children
of serving or retired officers belonging to Central Civil Services, Central Government
Employees, central Public sector Undertakings who served or serving outside
Telangana corresponding to the candidate s year/s of study outside Telangana in
G.O.Ms.No.150 dt.08-09-2025 is wholly illegal, arbitrary and contrary to law.2026:TSHC:17407-DB

q-,!iE!llF !7
(b) Writ of lt4andamus declaring that the petitioner is a Local candidate for all the
purposes of Admission into MBBS and BDS Courses for the Academic year 2026-27
under the aegis of KNR University of Health Sciences, Telangana State.
l.A. NO: 1 OF 2026
Petition under section 151 cPC praying that in the circumstances stated in the
affidavit filed in support of the petition, the High court may be pleased to direct the
respondents to consider the case of the petitioner into the admissions of MBBS and
BDS Cor-rrses for Academic year 2026-27 under aegis of KNR University of Health
science, Telangana state as local for the State of Telangana pending disposal of the
Writ Petition in the interest of justice and equity
Counsel for the Petitioner: Sri. L. RAM SINGH
Counsel for the Respondent No.1: Sri. A. SUDERSHAN REDDY'
ADVOCATE GENERAL
Counsel for the Respondent No.2: Sri. T. SHARATH,
Standing Counsel for
Kaloji l,larayana Rao University of
Health Sciences
The Gourt made the following: ORDER2026:TSHC:17407-DB

-
IN THEHIGH COI]RT F\ORTHE STATEOF TEI.ANGANA
AT TIYDERABAD
THE HON'BLE THE CHIEF JUSTICE SRI APARESH KT'MAR SINGH
AND
THE HON'BLE SRI JUSTICE G.M.MOHIUDDIN
WRIT PE"IITION No.26147 of 2o26
DATE: /7.0,A.20/26
BETWEEN:
Savalam Rupshika
Rep. bv her Father and Guardian
Sri S.Sashi Kumar
....Petitioner
AND
The Telangana State, Represented
by the Principal Secretary, Health,
Medical and Family Welfare (C1)
Department and another
....Respondents
ORDER
Heard Sri L.Ram Singh, learned counsel for the petlttoner;
Sri A.Sudershan Reddy, learned Advocate General appearing for
respondent No. 1; Sri T.Sharath, learned Standing Counsel for
Kaloji Narayana Rao University of Health Sciences appearing for
respondent No.2 and perused the record.
2. The present '*.rit petition is hled with the following prayer:
"......issue a Writ of Mandamus, or anA other appropnate Wit, Order
or Direction to set aside Sub-Rule (a)(iii) of Rule 3 of the Telangana
Medica[ & Dental Colleges Admissioa (Admission tnto MBBS & BDS
Courses) Rules, 2A17, as amended bg G.O.Ms.No.150, Healtta
Medtcal & FamtLg Welfare (C1) Department, dated 08.09.2025,
insofor as it excludes the chtldren of emplogees of the Central2026:TSHC:17407-DB

'l-
2
Gauenttt)-e.t on(l CctiraL Gouemment Corporattons, os being illegal.
clrbitr.trlj, t t rrreri sotoble, dlscflminatory, ultre ui.res, 1nd violatiue of
Ar11ci.s i,,and 1 5 cl the C'crLstttliian of lndLa;
CorL-se?rre,rll!. dt,clore the Petittoner as a- Laca! Candid.ate of the Stqle
of 'l el;r,clctrtt,ror ail pu?oses of admission rnto MBBS & BDS Courses
for tl..€ ,\c'tdemt:'\'+,ar 2026 27 under the oegLs of Rt'spondent \a.2
.(-i\,Q ''. rr r.sitir cr r leaith \ctence-s, en-d r.lirect tlv ?espandents to
co t ! si (1.' i t; ! " P e, I 1o,1 e r's candi datt re accor di ng I y :
prr.ss silcli oaket ord?r or orc)ers es tlls Honble Court mag deem ftL
arLd p-c:;t<; rr lrE iiici.s and circumstaflces ol' the ctse end irt the
i.lt'r":l af i 1s:1a t '
Factual Matrix
3. 'i'hr. rr'ri1,')n.'r :-..lirrns,:.hika. is the claugh-,cr cf Sri S Sashi
Kltm, i:. ,eh Ir-::s .:, l:r,,- ,r aernanenI res de]1r ol l{vCerabad. The
petiti,i)irer- qirriiirca i-; NeET (L-fc) 2026, securing 480 marks and
ai Alr-ln(lia llierk ci i 17195. and is thus eiigibie to seek admission
io rht MIlB-q 'Bi)S ccurses loi tire Acadernic Year 2A26-27
4.
Ma-iz:gr:i, irr l,rcli,rr ()il Cr;rporation Limitecl (IOCL) Officer
bclonging i() (ir:rce (i Central Government Public Sector
Untler-taking Sen.rce. -,r-ho.loined service in 2OA2 anct, in the course
of his rrmpioy'neili u'as transferred to New Delhi r,',.e.f.,
01 .115 .202-?. 'i hi re Lrr s: jli . o:.rtilrues 10 serv..
5. ri-s tLa r;e.iii(;:iii l-\ i:r.3 ,ermanenl resident of l{yderabad ancl
o. :r.:( oLlnr rr: he,:- la ther's [ransfer, she has studied t]lass I to IV in
Si. .\r:.i:e.,r's Sch,rcl. Ser.rrrderabaci Tclangana, and (llass V to IX'l'hc :.i:ii i)r^.r'i's ;a .her :s ar. emplcl ec oi the General2026:TSHC:17407-DB

-a
in DAV Public School, Sector 14, Gurugram, Haryana and Class -
X in Meru School, Serilingampaliy, Ranga Reddy District'
Hyderabad, Teiangana and Class XI and XII from Sri Chaitanya Jr'
Kalasala, Bharyanagar, Kukatpally, Hyderabad, Telangana' Thus,
the petitioner could not complete the requisite four consecutive
academrc years of study within Telangana on account of her
fathe r's tiansfer outside the State.
6. The petitioner relies upon the Residence Certificate rssued b1'
the Tahsildar, Serlingampally Mandal, dated 30.07 2C26, certilving
that the petitioner is a native of Telangana Notwithstanding the
above, the petitioner does not lal1 within any of the four categones
specified in the proviso to Rule 3(a)(iii), as her lather is an
employee of IOCL, a Public Sector Undertaking Service, and does
not belong to any of the categories enumerated therern.
Consequently, the petitioner is not being treated as a 1ocal
candidate' under the impugned Rule,
7. Aggrieved by the petitioner's exclusion from the benefit of the
said proviso, despite her having pursued education outside lhe
State solely on account of her father's ofhcial transfer, the
petitioner has approached this Court challengrng the validity of the
impugned provision and seeking consequential relief.2026:TSHC:17407-DB

E
4
Submissions on behalf of the petitioner
8. 'fhe learned counsel for the petrtioner advanced the following
submissions he:eund er
i) 1'hat ihe classification made under the proviso to Rule
il(a)(riit is ir holir, arbitran' and unreasonable. The very object
of the r,'xception is to protect candrdates who could not
oui sue t-1^ eir eciucation \i-ithin Telangana for the recuisite
perioC. ;-rcl b-, chorce. but on account of the transferable
r ature of '-herr parcnt's employment. Having r.:cognised such
nardsnrp rn respect of four categories o1'emp.oyees, there is
1ro jLlsir1-rcation fc: excl,-rding children of Central Government
:molosr:cs ano emDloyees of Centrirl Govemment
Corpor-.ltions / U nde rtakings.
ii) That thcre is no rational or intelligible differentia between
.:l-iildrrl cl it'ranqana State Governmr:nt errplol'ees and
''l-rildrct r,.i Ccnt rzrj Government en-,ployees, such as
r:rnplo', ee s of Ir)Ci-. insofar as the hardship arising from
iransfer is r:onr:erned. In both cases. rhe child is required to
rclor:ate c>,-r tside the State on account of the parent's official
, ransfei T.e ,Cistinction based solelv on the nature of the
i,rxplo]-er h;rs nr, rational nexus q'ith the objec: sought to be
,', hi,.,.e, )\ I.tc RrilL.2026:TSHC:17407-DB

-5
iii) That the classiltcation is manifestly under-inclusive, as it
i,r)excludes an identihable class of similarly situated persons,
namely, children of Central Government employees and
employees of Central Government
Corporations/ Undertakings, who are equally liable to be
transferred outside the State in the course of their
employment and consequently suffer the same disabiliry.
That the petitioner is denied the benefit of locai candidature
sole1y on the basis of the nature of her parent's emplcyer,
which is wholly unrelated to her educational hardship or her
genuine connection with the State of Telalgana. The relevant
consideration ought to be the rleason for studying outside the
State and not whether the parent is emplol,ed b], the State
Government or the Central Government.
That having recognised the hardship caused by compulsory
transfer of parents in the specified categories, it is arbitrary
and unjustified to deny the same benefit to the petitioner
merely because her father is employed by a Central
Covernmen t Corporation.
That this Court in the interim order dated L1.O9.2O25
passed in W.P.No.2751 1 of 2025, wherein, in an identical
challenge, it was prima facie foond the exclusion of children
of Central Government employees to be arbitrary andv)
vi)2026:TSHC:17407-DB

E
6
violar.ir'. ,rf Arriclr: 14 and granted interirn relief, The facts of
t-hc p:esent r:ase, according to the learned counsel, are
marterialir simiiar and, therefore, the petitioner is entitled to
similar orotection.
Submissions on behalf of the respondents
9. The lt:a.ned Advocate General appearing for respondent No.1
has conrenCeil tfiar rvhiie iraming the proviso to Rule 3(altiii)
pursllant 1; 1[r' j,.rdgment of the Honble Supre,rrre Cou,-t dated
0i.19 2025 in Clvii Appeal Nos.2i536,21588 of 2024 and
con c:tec bzti:h. lhe Statc G;vcrnmen'- haci coniinerl the exception
to categories ol empior.ees having a direct nexus with the State
Govenrment. Hou,ever, it is submitted that the rationale underlying
the ex:eptirrr. n;rrnel... protectrng children who r.r,er,_- compelled to
pur:iuc th.ei; r:ducation outside the State on ac(.ount of their
parenas offic al ir:insfe;-s, u'ould equally apply t. children of
Cen',rai Go\.ernmcnt emplot-ees. It is also assured that the issue is
undr:r active consrderation of the Stale Government and that
appropriate antcndment or clarification is likely to be issued.
10. Wc hav.:' tal<eit iroie c;f the respective submissicns urged and
ien ;r I th, n. c a'. . .... .,)i..:.2026:TSHC:17407-DB

-
Consideration by this Court
11. The challenge primarily is so far excluding the Public Sector
Undertaking Service Employees posted out of the State of
Telangana and their children by virtue of their parents'
employment could not study in the State of Telangana for the last
four years within the state of Telangana solely on account of her
father's official transfer, and for which reason they are getting
excluded from participating in the medical Entrance Admission
both for the MBBS & BDS Courses.
L2. Perusal of the Rules would show that the Government, in
fact, has carved out certain excep*tions for certain category of
candidates, which for ready reference are reproduced hereunder:
(a) A candidate Jor admiss[on into undergraduqte courses
under Competent AuthoitA Suota in Telangarta should beIndian NattonaL/ Person of Indian Oigin (PIO)/ Ouerseas
Cltizens of India (OCI) card holde-r qnd shall fulfil the follouingprousions:
r) If the candidate ha,s studied in educational Instttuttons in
such local area for a peiod of not less than four consecuttue
academic gears ending uith the academic gear in uhich h-e
appeared or as the case maA be fi.rst appeared in the releuant
qu ahfg ing e x amr n ati o n.
("r)
ii) l here duing the uhole or ang part cf ttrc four cotseqlttue
academic gears ending uith the academic gear in uhich he
appeared, or as the case mqA be, f.rst appeared for tlrc
releuant quahfgtng examination, he has not studied in any
educational institutions, if he has resided in- that tocaL area for
a peiod of not less than four Vears immediatelg preceding the
date of commencement of the reteuant qualifuing examination
wltich he appeared or as the case maA be frst appeared.
iii) l,ocal area herein meqns tlle State of Telangano. Furlher, tn
case the candidqte ho.s not studied in anA educational2026:TSHC:17407-DB

-8
in-sfiir,troir and hos resided in the locctl area as stated at (it)
abote' to be eligtible for admtssion into un(lergraduate courses
under (io,n-p<:tent Authoitg Quota', the cqrtdidate should haue
appeored for th.' releuant quahfytng examinatton in the State of
TelanirJ r,nt:
1. Prornded lh,oi e condidate who studies oulside Telangana
for anq ptnocl dun tg the requisite four conseqttiue academic
gears er.d,ng LL,tlh the ocademic gear in whtch he appeared, or
as f/k, ca..te rrtatl bt:, first appeared in the releuant quatifAing
exatr,iil.t:1tlt Luil be eitctiblt: to be considered if they J ell under
anll oj the belott calegoies:
i. Ch,ldren of emplogees of the Telangana State
:.;ot)emtneti roho haue serued or are serving outside
Telotqano cotesponding to the candidate's Aear/s of
.. trtd, ellts I d-e Tel ang ana.
2. (.)hilclren of seruing or retired offi.cers belongtng to the-!-elenqdr( coclre qf Ali htdta Seruices (IAS/ IFS/ rPS) uho
) aue seritec.L or ore seruing outside Telangana
t'cirespottciing to tlrc candidate s gear,l s of studtt outside.o'o1 1tn13. t)i drt'r,. cl' rieJence personneL/' ex-seruicenten1Centrctl
,\nrred Polrce Force seruice uho, at the ttme qf joining
:,?1'u:.e. b.t..,e cleclored their hometolrtL to be it th"e State
o.f leiangana antd toho haue secured or are seruing
c';istCe T elotrylaia conesponding to th,e catidrdate s
ltett/ s oJ' studlt outside Telartgona.
1. Jlrildrer, c,' etLplogees of a Corporatton/ ,7gencg,/
htstn.LmenleLiil1 under Gouentment of TeLatlgana, liable to
Le tratlsfered anqu)here in Indiq as per the tenns and
catiditlotls ,tf hrsl'her emploqment, who hque serued or.ire serurnq outside Telangana correspondirlg to the
cendtciat"'s geo.r/ s of studg outside Telangana."
(Emphasis sttpplied)
13. I.-rom I he plain readlng of the aforesaid clauses, it is relevant
to rotc thal if exceptions can be carved out lor those categories,
reflect(id in the atr.csaiC clauses of exceptions. then is no
just;liable reason for exclllding the Central Governm:nt employees
,osiec outsrcie of State of Telangana and their :hildren from
al:a1 i.g bencii c: t--r e said exception so carved out.2026:TSHC:17407-DB

-9
14, In view of the fair and constructive concession made by the
learned Advocate General for the State, wherein it has been
expressly assured to this Court that appropriate clarification or
amendment to G.O.Ms.No.15O would be issued to include the
children of Central Government employees, Central Public Sector
Undertakings, and Central Government Corporations within the
ambit of the provisc to Rule 3(a), this Court does not deem il
necessary to adjudrcate upon the constitutional validity of the
impugned Government Order at this stage. Instead, adopting a
purposive and constructive approdch. and in order to prevent
irreparable hardship to the petitioner and similariy situated
candidates pending the finalization,of the proposed amendment,
this Court issues the following directions.
15. For the reasons recorded hereinabove, and in light of the
submissions made by the learned Advocate Generai on behalf of
the State, this Writ Petition is disposed of with the following
directions:
It is hereby declared that the proviso to Rule 3(a)(iii) of the
Telangana Medical & Dental Colleges Admission (Admission
into MBBS & BDS Courses) Rules, 2017, as amended by
G.O.Ms.No.150, Health, Medical & Family Welfare iC1)
Department, dated 08.09.2025, shall, pending the issuance
of a formal amendment, be read to include children ofI2026:TSHC:17407-DB

E
ii1
1'10
emplo\,'ee: o" the Central Government, Central Government
Corporatirns, and Central Public Scctor Unrlertakings, who
have ser,.'ecl oia are sen'ing outside Telangana, for the
extension c[ the benefit of the said pioviso, on the same
'ieicrs anj condrlions as are applicable to the children of
St.lte (iovernment employees.
Const'cper:th'. res:ondent No.2, the Kaloji Naral'ana Rao
Universitl, oi Health Sciences, is ciirecteci to treat the
petitione'r as a ior;al candidate for the purpose of aclmission
intc I"'1BBS,/B[)S course s for the Acacie mrc Ye ar 2026-27
lLn,:ie;- :he Cornp.len t Autl-rority Quota, and t,) permit her to
particirzrt. in t I're ongoing couhselling process accordjngly.
Thc ir' responcLenl State of Telangana is directed to
expeditioush'finalize and issue the necessary clariltcation or
foimal :.Lrnendrnent to G.O.Ms.No.150, as assured by the
Learnca Advc..:tc (]eneral, to incorporate the category of
:i-i-roio-...'r:e s (-.i C('1tral Government, Central Government
3orporeL'iions, arrl Central Public Sector Undertakrngs,
'*ithin the ambit cf the exception under the proviso to Ruie
.lra;.
,r is .-'ia.:11.C :har :he declaratior.r contained ir paragraph (i)
:rtreina-rrri.. . ,-L:- I :he re itcl granted to the p( titioner, shall2026:TSHC:17407-DB

-11
operate pro tanto pending the issuance of the formal
amendment by the State Government.
As a sequel, miscelianeous petitions, pending if any, stand
closed. No costs
SD/. T.SREENIVASA REDDY
ASSISTANT REGIST
//TRUE COPY//
CTION OFFICERTo,
PSR
TKS1. The Principal Secretary, Medical, Health and Family Welfare Department,Secretariat Building, Hyderabad, fuf"ngrnu. - ' -
2. The Registrar, Kaloji Narayana Rao University of Health Sciences, Warangal,Telangana State
3. One CC to SRt. L RAM S|NGH, Advocate [OPUCJ4. Two CCs to Gp FOR MED_ICAL HEATTH & FW, High Court for the State ofTelangana, at Hyderabad [OUT]5. Two CD Copies
*2026:TSHC:17407-DB

HIGH COURT
DATED: 17108t2026
ORDER
WP.No.26147 of 2026
DISPOSING OF
THE WRIT PETITION
WITHOUT COSTS.l:,
\r. \ l.,\
2u26 'ii)
4',/
\2:/lt09siP
-c
^J 1-
sr842026:TSHC:17407-DB
